What are the Signs of ADHD in Toddlers and Preschoolers?
Hyperactivity and impulsivity - core symptoms of ADHD - are developmentally appropriate for toddlers, which makes it all the more difficult to determine if ADHD is present in that age group.
In preschoolers ages 4 to 5, though, the most common ADHD symptom is hyperactivity, according to the National Institute of Mental Health (NIMH). DSM-5 criteria can be applied to diagnose preschool-aged children for ADHD. The following symptoms of hyperactivity, impulsivity, and inattention must be present for at least six months to merit a diagnosis:
Trouble holding attention on tasks or play activities.
Fidgeting, squirming, unable to sit still.
Often does not seem to listen when spoken to directly.
Blurting out answers or has trouble waiting their turn.
Often does not follow through on instructions (gets sidetracked or loses focus).
Forgetful in daily activities.
Seeming to be always on the go.
These symptoms also apply to children over the age of 5 when considering an ADHD diagnosis. For preschoolers,
the key is to figure out if your child’s behavior is developmentally age appropriate.
Dr. Mark Mahone, director of the department of neuropsychology at the Kennedy Krieger Institute in Baltimore, Maryland, recommends that parents look for these additional signs of ADHD in pre-school aged children:
Frequently aggressive with playmates.
Cannot hop on one foot by age 4.
Loses interest after engaging in an activity for a few moments.
Has been injured because of running or otherwise moving when told not to do so.
Dr. Tanya E. Froehlich, a developmental-behavioral pediatrician at the Cincinnati Children’s Hospital Medical Center, recommends taking note of the following to tell if a preschooler is showing signs of ADHD:
Any comments about the child’s behavior in their preschool or daycare.
Your child’s ability to follow one or two-step directions without getting distracted (i.e., hang up your coat and put away your shoes)
Your child’s difficulty with "circle time" and other group activities.
Whether you have avoided taking your child out in public, even to family-friendly places, because of his or her behavior.
How is ADHD Diagnosed in Toddlers and Preschoolers?
An ADHD diagnosis in children is made in part by asking teachers and other caregivers about the child's behavior in different settings - for example, at home and at school.
The AAP, however, signals some challenges in identifying ADHD symptoms in preschoolers:
Preschoolers are not likely to have a dedicated observer if they attend certain preschools or childcare programs.
Preschool and/or daycare staff might be less knowledgeable about ADHD symptoms than are elementary school teachers.
Parents may be asked by clinicians to complete a parent-training program or to place their child in a qualified preschool program before confirming an ADHD diagnosis. Both environments could be appropriate settings for identifying ADHD symptoms in preschoolers.